'\" t
.TH groff_char @MAN7EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
groff_char \- GNU roff special character and glyph repertoire
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" This file is part of groff (GNU roff), which is a free software
.\" project.
.\"
.\" You can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU
.\" General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
.\" either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later
.\" version.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.
.\"
.\" If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html>.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_groff_char_7_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
The GNU
.I roff
typesetting system has a large glyph repertoire suitable for production
of varied literary,
professional,
technical,
and mathematical documents.
.
However,
its input character set is restricted to that defined by the standards
ISO \%Latin-1
(ISO \%8859-1)
and IBM code page 1047
(an arrangement of EBCDIC).
.
For ease of document maintenance in \%UTF-8 environments,
it is advisable to use only the Unicode basic Latin code points,
a subset of all of the foregoing historically referred to as \%US-ASCII,
.\" Yes, a subset, albeit a permutation as well in the cp1047 case.
which has only 94 visible,
printable code points.
.\" In groff, 0x20 SP is mapped to a space node, not a glyph node, and
.\" all kinds of special behavior attaches to such nodes, so we count
.\" only to 94 and not 95 as is often done in other ASCII contexts.
.
.
.P
AT&T
.I troff
in the 1970s faced a similar problem of typesetter devices with a glyph
repertoire differing from that of the computers that controlled them.
.
The solution
.I troff
adopted was a form of escape sequence known as a
.I special character
to access several dozen additional glyphs available in the fonts
prepared for mounting in the phototypesetter.
.
These glyphs were mapped onto a two-character name space for a degree
of mnemonic convenience;
for example,
the escape sequence
.B \e(aa
encoded an acute accent and
.B \e(sc
a section sign.
.
.
.P
As in other respects,
.I groff
has removed historical
.I roff
limitations on the lengths of special character escapes,
but recognizes and retains compatibility with the historical names.
.
.I groff
expands the lexicon of glyphs available by name and permits users to
define their own special character escapes with the
.B .char
request.
.
.
.P
This document lists all of the glyph names predefined by
.I groff
and describes the systematic notation by which it enables access to
arbitrary Unicode code points and construction of composite glyphs.
.
The glyphs listed in this document may not be available,
or may vary in appearance,
depending on the output device chosen when the page was rendered
(with the
.B \-T
option to the
.IR man (1)
or
.I roff
programs).
.
The device used in generation of this page was \[lq]\*[.T]\[rq].
.
.
.P
A few escape sequences that are not special character escapes also
produce glyphs;
these exist for syntactical or historical reasons.
.
They include
.BR \e\e ,
.BR \e\[aq] ,
.BR \e\[ga] ,
.BR \e\- ,
.B \e.\&
(backslash-dot),
and
.BR \ee ;
see
.IR groff (@MAN7EXT@).
.
Of these,
only
.B \e\-
is also available as a special character of the same name,
in the form
.BR \e[\-] .
.
A small number of special characters represent glyphs that are not
encoded in Unicode;
examples include the baseline rule
.B \e[ru]
and the Bell Systems logo
.B \e[bs].
.
.
.P
In
.IR groff ,
you can test output device support for any character
(ordinary or special)
with the conditional
.RB \[lq] c \[rq].
.
.RS
.\" https://www.bell-labs.com/usr/dmr/www/ ("In 1984, ...")
.EX
\&.ie c \e[bs] \e{Welcome to the \e[bs] Bell System;
did you get the Wehrmacht helmet or the Death Star?\e}
\&.el No Bell Systems logo.
.EE
.RE
.
.
.P
For brevity in the remainder of this document,
we shall refer to systems conforming to the
ISO 646:1991 IRV,
ISO 8859,
or
ISO 10646 (\[lq]Unicode\[rq])
character encoding standards as \[lq]ISO\[rq] systems,
and those employing IBM code page 1047 as \[lq]EBCDIC\[rq] systems.
.
That said,
EBCDIC systems that support
.I groff
are known to also support \%UTF-8.
.
.
.P
While
.I groff
accepts eight-bit encoded input,
not all such code points are valid as input.
.
.\" src/libs/libgroff/invalid.cpp
On ISO platforms,
character codes
0,
11,
13\[en]31,
and
128\[en]159
are invalid.
.
(This is all C0 and C1 controls except for
SOH through LF
[Control+A to Control+J],
and FF
[Control+L].)
.
On EBCDIC platforms,
0,
8\[en]9,
11,
13\[en]20,
23\[en]31,
and
48\[en]63
are invalid.
.
Some of these code points are used by
.I groff
for internal purposes,
which is one reason it does not support \%UTF-8 natively.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Fundamental character set"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The ninety-four characters noted above,
plus the space and the newline,
form the fundamental character
set for
.I groff
input;
anything in the language,
even over one million code points in Unicode,
can be expressed using it.
.
On ISO systems,
code points in the range 33\[en]126 comprise a common set of
printable glyphs in all of the aforementioned ISO character encoding
standards.
.
It is this character set and
(with some noteworthy exceptions)
the corresponding repertoire for which AT&T
.I troff
was implemented.
.
On EBCDIC systems,
printable characters are in the range 66\[en]201 and 203\[en]254;
those without counterparts in the ISO range 33\[en]126 are discussed
in the next subsection.
.\" From this point, do not talk about numerical character assignments.
.
.
.P
All of the following characters map to glyphs as you would expect.
.TS
center box;
lf(CR).
! # $ % & ( ) * + , . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; < = > ? @
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z [ ] _
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z { | }
.TE
.
.
.P
The remaining seven of the ninety-four code points in this range
surprise computing professionals and others intimately familiar with the
ISO character encodings.
.
The developers of AT&T
.I troff
chose mappings for them that would be useful for typesetting technical
literature in a broad range of scientific disciplines;
the preparation of AT&T's patent filings with the U.S.\& government
was the application of the system that \[lq]paid the bills\[rq] at the
Bell Labs site where
.I troff
and Unix were first developed.
.
It is also worth noting that the prevailing character encoding standard
in the 1970s,
USAS X3.4-1968 (\[lq]ASCII\[rq])
deliberately supported semantic ambiguity at some code points,
and outright substitution at several others,
to suit the localization demands of various national standards bodies.
.
.
.P
The table below presents the seven exceptional code points
with their typical keycap engravings,
their glyph mappings and semantics in
.I roff
systems,
and the escapes producing the Unicode basic Latin character they
replace.
.
The first,
the neutral double quote,
is a partial exception because it does represent itself,
but since it is also used by
.I roff
systems to quote macro arguments,
.I groff
supports a special character escape as an alternative form so that
the glyph can be easily included in macro arguments without requiring
the user to master the quoting rules that AT&T
.I troff
required in that context.
.
Furthermore,
not all of the special character escapes are portable to AT&T
.I troff
and all of its descendants;
these
.I groff
extensions are presented using its special character escape form
.BR \[rs][] ,
whereas portable special character escapes are shown in the traditional
.B \[rs](
form.
.
.B \[rs]\-
and
.B \[rs]e
are portable to all known
.IR troff s.
.
Note,
however,
that
.B \[rs]e
means \[lq]the glyph of the current escape character\[rq];
it therefore can produce unexpected output if the
.B .ec
or
.B .eo
requests are used.
.
On devices with a limited glyph repertoire,
the appearances of glyphs on the same row of the table may be identical;
except for the neutral double quote,
this will
.I not
be the case on more-capable devices.
.
Review your document on as many different postprocessors as possible.
.
.\" XXX: move these to tty.tmac instead?
.fchar \[u02C6] ^
.fchar \[u02DC] ~
.TS
center box;
l l l.
Keycap	Appearance and meaning	Special character and meaning
_
"	" neutral double quote	\f[B]\[rs][dq]\f[] neutral double quote
\[aq]	\[cq] closing single quote	\f[B]\[rs][aq]\f[] neutral apostrophe
\-	- hyphen	\f[B]\[rs]\-\f[] or \f[B]\[rs][\-]\f[] hyphen-minus
\[rs]	(escape character)	\f[B]\[rs]e\f[] or \f[B]\[rs][rs]\f[] reverse solidus
\[ha]	\[u02C6] modifier circumflex	\f[B]\[rs](ha\f[] circumflex/caret/\[lq]hat\[rq]
\[ga]	\[oq] opening single quote	\f[B]\[rs](ga\f[] grave accent
\[ti]	\[u02DC] modifier tilde	\f[B]\[rs](ti\f[] tilde
.TE
.fchar \[u02C6]
.fchar \[u02DC]
.
.
.P
The hyphen-minus is a particularly unfortunate case of overloading.
.
Its awkward name in ISO 8859 and later standards reflects the many
conflicting purposes to which it had already been put in the 1980s,
including
a hyphen,
a minus sign,
and
(alone or in repetition)
dashes of varying widths.
.
For best results in
.IR groff ,
use the character in input without an escape
.I only
to mean a hyphen,
as in the phrase \[lq]long-term\[rq].
.
For a minus sign or a Unix command-line option dash,
use
.B \[rs]\-
(or
.B \[rs][\-]
in
.I groff
if you find it helps the clarity of the source document).
.
AT&T
.I troff
supported en- and em-dashes as
.B \[rs](en
and
.B \[rs](em
respectively.
.
.
.P
The special character escape for the apostrophe as a neutral single
quote is typically needed only in technical content;
typing words like \[lq]can't\[rq] and \[lq]Anne's\[rq] in a natural way
will render correctly,
because an apostrophe is typeset either as a closing single quotation
mark or as a neutral single quote in ordinary prose,
depending on the capabilities of the output device.
.
By contrast,
special character escapes should be used for quotation marks unless
portability to limited or historical
.I troff
implementations is necessary;
on those systems,
the input convention is to pair the grave accent with the apostrophe for
single quotes,
and to double both characters for double quotes.
.
AT&T
.I troff
defined no special characters for quotation marks or apostrophes.
.
Note that repeated single quotes
(\[oq]\[oq]thus\[cq]\[cq])
will be visually distinguishable from double quotes
(\[lq]thus\[rq])
on terminal devices,
and perhaps on others
(depending on the font selected).
.
.TS
tab(@) center box;
l l.
AT&T \f[I]troff\f[] input@recommended \f[I]groff\f[] input
_
A Winter\[aq]s Tale@A Winter\[aq]s Tale
\[ga]U.K.\& outer quotes\[aq]@\f[B]\[rs][oq]\f[]U.K.\& outer quotes\f[B]\[rs][cq]\f[]
\[ga]U.K.\& \[ga]\[ga]inner\[aq]\[aq] quotes\[aq]@\f[B]\[rs][oq]\f[]U.K.\& \f[B]\[rs][lq]\f[]inner\f[B]\[rs][rq]\f[] quotes\f[B]\[rs][cq]\f[]
\[ga]\[ga]U.S.\& outer quotes\[aq]\[aq]@\f[B]\[rs][lq]\f[]U.S.\& outer quotes\f[B]\[rs][rq]\f[]
\[ga]\[ga]U.S.\& \[ga]inner\[aq] quotes\[aq]\[aq]@\f[B]\[rs][lq]\f[]U.S.\& \f[B]\[rs][oq]\f[]inner\f[B]\[rs][cq]\f[] quotes\f[B]\[rs][rq]\f[]
.TE
.\" paragraph necessary due to tbl spacing bug with box usage; see
.\" https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/groff/2020-07/msg00053.html
.
.
.P
If you expect to use quotation marks frequently in your document,
see if the macro package you're using defines strings or macros to
facilitate quotation.
.
.
.P
Using Unicode basic Latin characters to compose boxes and lines is
ill-advised.
.
.I roff
systems have special characters for drawing straight horizontal and
vertical lines;
see subsection \[lq]Rules and lines\[rq] below.
.
Preprocessors like
.IR @g@tbl (@MAN1EXT@)
and
.IR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@)
draw boxes and will produce the best possible output for the device,
falling back to basic Latin glyphs only when necessary.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Eight-bit encodings and \%Latin-1 supplement"
.\" ====================================================================
.
ISO 646 is a seven-bit code encoding 128 code points;
eight-bit codes are twice the size.
.
ISO 8859-1 and code page 1047 allocated the additional space to what
Unicode calls \[lq]C1 controls\[rq]
(control characters)
and the \[lq]\%Latin-1 supplement\[rq].
.
The C1 controls are neither printable nor usable as
.I groff
input.
.
.
.P
Two non-printing characters in the \%Latin-1 supplement are handled
specially.
.
.
.TP
NBSP
encodes the no-break space,
and is mapped to
.BR \[rs]\[ti] ,
the adjustable non-breaking space escape.
.
.
.TP
SHY
encodes the soft hyphen character.
.
.I groff
never uses this character for output
(thus it is omitted in the table below);
on input it is mapped to the hyphenation control escape,
.BR \[rs]% .
.
.
.P
The remaining characters in the \%Latin-1 supplement represent
themselves.
.
Although they can be specified directly with the keyboard on systems
configured to use \%Latin-1 as the character encoding,
it is more portable,
both to other
.I roff
systems and to \%UTF-8 environments,
to use their glyph names,
shown below.
.
.P
.TS
l2 l l l2 l l.
\[r!]	\e[r!]	inverted exclamation mark	\[~N]	\e[\[ti]N]	N tilde
\[ct]	\e[ct]	cent sign	\[`O]	\e[\[ga]O]	O grave
\[Po]	\e[Po]	pound sign	\['O]	\e[\[aq]O]	O acute
\[Cs]	\e[Cs]	currency sign	\[^O]	\e[\[ha]O]	O circumflex
\[Ye]	\e[Ye]	yen sign	\[~O]	\e[\[ti]O]	O tilde
\[bb]	\e[bb]	broken bar	\[:O]	\e[:O]	O dieresis
\[sc]	\e[sc]	section sign	\[mu]	\e[mu]	multiplication sign
\[ad]	\e[ad]	dieresis accent	\[/O]	\e[/O]	O slash
\[co]	\e[co]	copyright sign	\[`U]	\e[\[ga]U]	U grave
\[Of]	\e[Of]	feminine ordinal indicator	\['U]	\e[\[aq]U]	U acute
\[Fo]	\e[Fo]	left double chevron	\[^U]	\e[\[ha]U]	U circumflex
\[no]	\e[no]	logical not	\[:U]	\e[:U]	U dieresis
\[rg]	\e[rg]	registered sign	\['Y]	\e[\[aq]Y]	Y acute
\[a-]	\e[a\-]	macron accent	\[TP]	\e[TP]	uppercase thorn
\[de]	\e[de]	degree sign	\[ss]	\e[ss]	lowercase sharp s
\[+-]	\e[+\-]	plus-minus	\[`a]	\e[\[ga]a]	a grave
\[S2]	\e[S2]	superscript two	\['a]	\e[\[aq]a]	a acute
\[S3]	\e[S3]	superscript three	\[^a]	\e[\[ha]a]	a circumflex
\[aa]	\e[aa]	acute accent	\[~a]	\e[\[ti]a]	a tilde
\[mc]	\e[mc]	micro sign	\[:a]	\e[:a]	a dieresis
\[ps]	\e[ps]	pilcrow sign	\[oa]	\e[oa]	a ring
\[pc]	\e[pc]	centered period	\[ae]	\e[ae]	a+e combined
\[ac]	\e[ac]	cedilla accent	\[,c]	\e[,c]	c cedilla
\[S1]	\e[S1]	superscript one	\[`e]	\e[\[ga]e]	e grave
\[Om]	\e[Om]	masculine ordinal indicator	\['e]	\e[\[aq]e]	e acute
\[Fc]	\e[Fc]	right double chevron	\[^e]	\e[\[ha]e]	e circumflex
\[14]	\e[14]	one quarter symbol	\[:e]	\e[:e]	e dieresis
\[12]	\e[12]	one half symbol	\[`i]	\e[\[ga]i]	i grave
\[34]	\e[34]	three quarters symbol	\['i]	\e[\[aq]i]	e acute
\[r?]	\e[r?]	inverted question mark	\[^i]	\e[\[ha]i]	i circumflex
\[`A]	\e[\[ga]A]	A grave	\[:i]	\e[:i]	i dieresis
\['A]	\e[\[aq]A]	A acute	\[Sd]	\e[Sd]	lowercase eth
\[^A]	\e[\[ha]A]	A circumflex	\[~n]	\e[\[ti]n]	n tilde
\[~A]	\e[\[ti]A]	A tilde	\[`o]	\e[\[ga]o]	o grave
\[:A]	\e[:A]	A dieresis	\['o]	\e[\[aq]o]	o acute
\[oA]	\e[oA]	A ring	\[^o]	\e[\[ha]o	o circumflex
\[AE]	\e[AE]	A+E combined	\[~o]	\e[\[ti]o]	o tilde
\[,C]	\e[,C]	C cedilla	\[:o]	\e[:o]	o dieresis
\[`E]	\e[\[ga]E]	E grave	\[di]	\e[di]	division sign
\['E]	\e[\[aq]E]	E acute	\[/o]	\e[/o]	o slash
\[^E]	\e[\[ha]E]	E circumflex	\[`u]	\e[\[ga]u]	u grave
\[:E]	\e[:E]	E dieresis	\['u]	\e[\[aq]u]	u acute
\[`I]	\e[\[ga]I]	I grave	\[^u]	\e[\[ha]u]	u circumflex
\['I]	\e[\[aq]I]	I acute	\[:u]	\e[:u]	u dieresis
\[^I]	\e[\[ha]I]	I circumflex	\['y]	\e[\[aq]y]	y acute
\[:I]	\e[:I]	I dieresis	\[Tp]	\e[Tp]	lowercase thorn
\[-D]	\e[\-D]	uppercase eth	\[:y]	\e[:y]	y dieresis
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Named glyphs"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Glyph names can be embedded into the document text by using escape
sequences.
.
.IR groff (@MAN7EXT@)
describes how these escape sequences look.
.
Glyph names can consist of quite arbitrary characters from the
ASCII or \%latin1 code set, not only alphanumeric characters.
.
Here some examples:
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]( gl
is a special character escape for the glyph with the 2-character name
.IR gl .
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs][ glyph-name ]
is a special character escape for
.IR glyph-name ,
which can be of arbitrary length.
.
Note that an ordinary input character
.RI \[lq] c \[rq]
is not the same as
.BI \[rs][ c ]\c
;
the latter is internally mapped to glyph name
.RB \[lq] \[rs] \c
.IR c \[rq].
.
In other words,
.RB \[lq] \[rs][a] \[rq]
is not \[lq]a\[rq],
but rather
.BR \[rs]a ,
the uninterpreted leader escape sequence.
.
By default,
.I groff
defines a single glyph name of length one,
namely the hyphen-minus,
which can be accessed as either
.B \[rs]\-
or
.BR \[rs][\-] .
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs][ "base-glyph composite-1 composite-2"\~\c
\&.\|.\|.\~\c
.IB composite-n ]
is a composite glyph;
see below for a more detailed description.
.
.
.P
In
.IR groff ,
each eight-bit input character can also be referred to by the construct
.BI \[rs][char NNN ]\c
, where
.I NNN
is the decimal code of the character,
a number between 0 and\~255
without leading zeroes.
.
These entities are
.I not
glyph names.
.
They are normally mapped onto glyphs using the
.B .trin
request.
.
.
.P
Another special convention is the handling of glyphs with names directly
derived from a Unicode code point; this is shown in the
\[lq]Unicode\[rq] column of the table below.
.
In general,
all glyphs not having a name as listed in this manual page can be
accessed with the
.BI \[rs][u XXXX ]
construct.
.
Refer to section \[lq]Using Symbols\[rq] in
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" ,
the
.I groff
Texinfo manual,
which describes how
.I groff
glyph names are constructed.
.
.
.P
Moreover,
new glyph names can be created by the
.B .char
request;
see
.IR groff (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.
.P
.
Conversely,
a handful of glyphs that are normally drawn from a regular font are
required in mathematical text.
.
Both sets of exceptions are noted in the tables where they appear
(\[lq]Logical symbols\[rq] and \[lq]Mathematical symbols\[rq]).
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Glyph Tables"
.\" ====================================================================
.
In this section,
.IR groff 's
glyph name repertoire is presented in tabular form.
.
The meanings of the columns are as follows.
.
.
.TP
.I Output
shows the glyph as it appears on the device used to render this
document;
although it can have a notably different shape on other devices
(and is subject to user-directed translation and replacement),
.I groff
attempts reasonable equivalency on all output devices.
.
.
.TP
.I Input
shows the
.I groff
character
(ordinary or special)
that normally produces the glyph.
.
.
.IP
Some code points have multiple glyph names.
.
.
.TP
.I AGL
gives the name of the glyph from the Adobe Glyph List (AGL).
.
.
.TP
.I Unicode
is the glyph name used in Unicode special character escapes.
.
The names in the Unicode column look like
.B u0021
or
.BR u0041_0300 .
.
In
.IR groff ,
the corresponding Unicode characters can be constructed by adding a
backslash and a pair of square brackets,
for example
.B \[rs][u0021]
or
.BR \[rs][u0041_0300] .
.
.
.P
In the following,
a plus sign \[lq]+\[rq] in the \[lq]Notes\[rq] column indicates that
the glyph name appears in the AT&T
.I troff
user's manual,
CSTR\~#54
(1992 revision).
.
When using the AT&T special character syntax
.BI \[rs]( xx\c
, portability can be expected from such names.
.
.
.P
Entries marked with \[lq]***\[rq] denote glyphs used for mathematical
purposes.
.
Historically,
such glyphs were typically drawn from a different font,
the \[lq]special\[rq] font.
.
Often,
such glyphs have metrics which look incongruous in normal text.
.
A few which are not uncommon in running prose have \[lq]text
variants\[rq],
and should work well in such contexts.
.
Conversely,
a handful of glyphs that are normally drawn from a regular font are
required in mathematical text.
.
Both sets of exceptions are noted in the tables where they appear
(\[lq]Logical symbols\[rq] and \[lq]Mathematical symbols\[rq]).
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Basic Latin"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Apart from basic Latin characters with special mappings,
described in subsection \[lq]Fundamental character set\[rq] above,
a few others in that range have special character glyph names.
.
.\" XXX: I surmise that...
These were defined for ease of input on non-U.S.\& keyboards lacking
keycaps for them,
or for symmetry with other special character glyph names serving a
similar purpose.
.
.
.P
Note the overloading of the vertical bar;
the
.B \[rs][ba]
and
.B \[rs][or]
escapes may render differently.
.
See subsection \[lq]Mathematical symbols\[rq] below for special variants
of the plus,
minus,
and equals
signs normally drawn from this range.
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[dq]	\e[dq]	quotedbl	u0022	neutral double quote
\[sh]	\e[sh]	numbersign	u0023	number sign
\[Do]	\e[Do]	dollar	u0024	dollar sign
\[aq]	\e[aq]	quotesingle	u0027	apostrophe, neutral single quote
\[sl]	\e[sl]	slash	u002F	slash, solidus +
\[at]	\e[at]	at	u0040	at sign
\[lB]	\e[lB]	bracketleft	u005B	left square bracket
\[rs]	\e[rs]	backslash	u005C	reverse solidus
\[ha]	\e[ha]	asciicircum	u005E	circumflex, caret, \[lq]hat\[rq] +
\[rB]	\e[rB]	bracketright	u005D	right square bracket
\[ul]	\e[ul]	underscore	u005F	underscore, low line +
\[lC]	\e[lC]	braceleft	u007B	left brace
|	|	bar	u007C	bar
\[ba]	\e[ba]	bar	u007C	bar
\[or]	\e[or]	bar	u007C	bitwise or +
\[rC]	\e[rC]	braceright	u007D	right brace
\[ti]	\e[ti]	asciitilde	u007E	tilde +
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Supplementary Latin letters"
.\" ====================================================================
.
\[lq]Lowercase f with hook\[rq] is also used as a function symbol;
see subsection \[lq]Mathematical symbols\[rq] below.
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[-D]	\e[-D]	Eth	u00D0	uppercase eth
\[Sd]	\e[Sd]	eth	u00F0	lowercase eth
\[TP]	\e[TP]	Thorn	u00DE	uppercase thorn
\[Tp]	\e[Tp]	thorn	u00FE	lowercase thorn
\[ss]	\e[ss]	germandbls	u00DF	lowercase sharp s
\[.i]	\e[.i]	dotlessi	u0131	i without tittle
\[.j]	\e[.j]	dotlessj	u0237	j without tittle
\[Fn]	\e[Fn]	florin	u0192	lowercase f with hook, function
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Ligatures
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[ff]	\e[ff]	ff	u0066_0066	ff ligature +
\[fi]	\e[fi]	fi	u0066_0069	fi ligature +
\[fl]	\e[fl]	fl	u0066_006C	fl ligature +
\[Fi]	\e[Fi]	ffi	u0066_0066_0069	ffi ligature +
\[Fl]	\e[Fl]	ffl	u0066_0066_006C	ffl ligature +
\[/L]	\e[/L]	Lslash	u0141	L slash
\[/l]	\e[/l]	lslash	u0142	l slash
\[/O]	\e[/O]	Oslash	u00D8	O slash
\[/o]	\e[/o]	oslash	u00F8	o slash
\[AE]	\e[AE]	AE	u00C6	A+E combined
\[ae]	\e[ae]	ae	u00E6	a+e combined
\[OE]	\e[OE]	OE	u0152	O+E combined
\[oe]	\e[oe]	oe	u0153	o+e combined
\[IJ]	\e[IJ]	IJ	u0132	I+J combined
\[ij]	\e[ij]	ij	u0133	i+j combined
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Accented characters"
.\" ====================================================================
.
All of these glyphs can be composed using combining glyph names as
described in subsection \[lq]Special character escape forms\[rq] above;
the names below can be thought of short aliases for convenience.
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\['A]	\e[\[aq]A]	Aacute	u0041_0301	A acute
\['C]	\e[\[aq]C]	Cacute	u0043_0301	C acute
\['E]	\e[\[aq]E]	Eacute	u0045_0301	E acute
\['I]	\e[\[aq]I]	Iacute	u0049_0301	I acute
\['O]	\e[\[aq]O]	Oacute	u004F_0301	O acute
\['U]	\e[\[aq]U]	Uacute	u0055_0301	U acute
\['Y]	\e[\[aq]Y]	Yacute	u0059_0301	Y acute
\['a]	\e[\[aq]a]	aacute	u0061_0301	a acute
\['c]	\e[\[aq]c]	cacute	u0063_0301	c acute
\['e]	\e[\[aq]e]	eacute	u0065_0301	e acute
\['i]	\e[\[aq]i]	iacute	u0069_0301	i acute
\['o]	\e[\[aq]o]	oacute	u006F_0301	o acute
\['u]	\e[\[aq]u]	uacute	u0075_0301	u acute
\['y]	\e[\[aq]y]	yacute	u0079_0301	y acute
\[:A]	\e[:A]	Adieresis	u0041_0308	A dieresis
\[:E]	\e[:E]	Edieresis	u0045_0308	E dieresis
\[:I]	\e[:I]	Idieresis	u0049_0308	I dieresis
\[:O]	\e[:O]	Odieresis	u004F_0308	O dieresis
\[:U]	\e[:U]	Udieresis	u0055_0308	U dieresis
\[:Y]	\e[:Y]	Ydieresis	u0059_0308	Y dieresis
\[:a]	\e[:a]	adieresis	u0061_0308	a dieresis
\[:e]	\e[:e]	edieresis	u0065_0308	e dieresis
\[:i]	\e[:i]	idieresis	u0069_0308	i dieresis
\[:o]	\e[:o]	odieresis	u006F_0308	o dieresis
\[:u]	\e[:u]	udieresis	u0075_0308	u dieresis
\[:y]	\e[:y]	ydieresis	u0079_0308	y dieresis
\[^A]	\e[\[ha]A]	Acircumflex	u0041_0302	A circumflex
\[^E]	\e[\[ha]E]	Ecircumflex	u0045_0302	E circumflex
\[^I]	\e[\[ha]I]	Icircumflex	u0049_0302	I circumflex
\[^O]	\e[\[ha]O]	Ocircumflex	u004F_0302	O circumflex
\[^U]	\e[\[ha]U]	Ucircumflex	u0055_0302	U circumflex
\[^a]	\e[\[ha]a]	acircumflex	u0061_0302	a circumflex
\[^e]	\e[\[ha]e]	ecircumflex	u0065_0302	e circumflex
\[^i]	\e[\[ha]i]	icircumflex	u0069_0302	i circumflex
\[^o]	\e[\[ha]o]	ocircumflex	u006F_0302	o circumflex
\[^u]	\e[\[ha]u]	ucircumflex	u0075_0302	u circumflex
\[`A]	\e[\[ga]A]	Agrave	u0041_0300	A grave
\[`E]	\e[\[ga]E]	Egrave	u0045_0300	E grave
\[`I]	\e[\[ga]I]	Igrave	u0049_0300	I grave
\[`O]	\e[\[ga]O]	Ograve	u004F_0300	O grave
\[`U]	\e[\[ga]U]	Ugrave	u0055_0300	U grave
\[`a]	\e[\[ga]a]	agrave	u0061_0300	a grave
\[`e]	\e[\[ga]e]	egrave	u0065_0300	e grave
\[`i]	\e[\[ga]i]	igrave	u0069_0300	i grave
\[`o]	\e[\[ga]o]	ograve	u006F_0300	o grave
\[`u]	\e[\[ga]u]	ugrave	u0075_0300	u grave
\[~A]	\e[\[ti]A]	Atilde	u0041_0303	A tilde
\[~N]	\e[\[ti]N]	Ntilde	u004E_0303	N tilde
\[~O]	\e[\[ti]O]	Otilde	u004F_0303	O tilde
\[~a]	\e[\[ti]a]	atilde	u0061_0303	a tilde
\[~n]	\e[\[ti]n]	ntilde	u006E_0303	n tilde
\[~o]	\e[\[ti]o]	otilde	u006F_0303	o tilde
\[vS]	\e[vS]	Scaron	u0053_030C	S caron
\[vs]	\e[vs]	scaron	u0073_030C	s caron
\[vZ]	\e[vZ]	Zcaron	u005A_030C	Z caron
\[vz]	\e[vz]	zcaron	u007A_030C	z caron
\[,C]	\e[,C]	Ccedilla	u0043_0327	C cedilla
\[,c]	\e[,c]	ccedilla	u0063_0327	c cedilla
\[oA]	\e[oA]	Aring	u0041_030A	A ring
\[oa]	\e[oa]	aring	u0061_030A	a ring
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Accents
.\" ====================================================================
.
The
.B .composite
request is used to map most of the accents to non-spacing glyph names;
the values given in parentheses are their spacing counterparts.
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[a"]	\e[a"]	hungarumlaut	u030B (u02DD)	double acute accent
\[a-]	\e[a-]	macron	u0304 (u00AF)	macron accent
\[a.]	\e[a.]	dotaccent	u0307 (u02D9)	dot accent
\[a^]	\e[a\[ha]]	circumflex	u0302 (u005E)	circumflex accent
\[aa]	\e[aa]	acute	u0301 (u00B4)	acute accent +
\[ga]	\e[ga]	grave	u0300 (u0060)	grave accent +
\[ab]	\e[ab]	breve	u0306 (u02D8)	breve accent
\[ac]	\e[ac]	cedilla	u0327 (u00B8)	cedilla accent
\[ad]	\e[ad]	dieresis	u0308 (u00A8)	dieresis accent
\[ah]	\e[ah]	caron	u030C (u02C7)	caron accent
\[ao]	\e[ao]	ring	u030A (u02DA)	ring accent
\[a~]	\e[a\[ti]]	tilde	u0303 (u007E)	tilde accent
\[ho]	\e[ho]	ogonek	u0328 (u02DB)	hook accent
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Quotation marks"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[Bq]	\e[Bq]	quotedblbase	u201E	low double comma quote
\[bq]	\e[bq]	quotesinglbase	u201A	low single comma quote
\[lq]	\e[lq]	quotedblleft	u201C	left double quote
\[rq]	\e[rq]	quotedblright	u201D	right double quote
\[oq]	\e[oq]	quoteleft	u2018	single open (left) quote
\[cq]	\e[cq]	quoteright	u2019	single closing (right) quote
\[aq]	\e[aq]	quotesingle	u0027	apostrophe, neutral single quote
\[dq]	\e[dq]	quotedbl	u0022	neutral double quote
\[Fo]	\e[Fo]	guillemotleft	u00AB	left double chevron
\[Fc]	\e[Fc]	guillemotright	u00BB	right double chevron
\[fo]	\e[fo]	guilsinglleft	u2039	left single chevron
\[fc]	\e[fc]	guilsinglright	u203A	right single chevron
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Punctuation
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[r!]	\e[r!]	exclamdown	u00A1	inverted exclamation mark
\[r?]	\e[r?]	questiondown	u00BF	inverted question mark
\[em]	\e[em]	emdash	u2014	em-dash +
\[en]	\e[en]	endash	u2013	en-dash
\[hy]	\e[hy]	hyphen	u2010	hyphen +
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Brackets
.\" ====================================================================
.
The extensible bracket pieces are font-invariant glyphs.
.
In AT&T
.IR troff ,
only one glyph was available to vertically extend
brackets,
braces,
and
parentheses:
.BR \[rs](bv .
.
We map it rather arbitrarily to U+23AA
(\[lq]curly bracket extension\[rq]).
.
.
.P
Note that not all devices contain extensible bracket pieces which can
be piled up with
.B \[rs]b
due to the restrictions of the escape's piling algorithm.
.
A general solution to build brackets out of pieces is the following
macro:
.
.
.RS
.EX
\&.\e" Make a pile centered vertically 0.5em above the baseline.
\&.\e" The first argument is placed at the top.
\&.\e" The pile is returned in string \[aq]pile\[aq].
\&.eo
\&.de pile-make
\&.  nr pile-wd 0
\&.  nr pile-ht 0
\&.  ds pile-args
\&.
\&.  nr pile-# \en[.$]
\&.  while \en[pile-#] \e{\e
\&.    nr pile-wd (\en[pile-wd] >? \ew\[aq]\e$[\en[pile-#]]\[aq])
\&.    nr pile-ht +(\en[rst] - \en[rsb])
\&.    as pile-args \ev\[aq]\en[rsb]u\[aq]\e"
\&.    as pile-args \eZ\[aq]\e$[\en[pile-#]]\[aq]\e"
\&.    as pile-args \ev\[aq]-\en[rst]u\[aq]\e"
\&.    nr pile-# -1
\&.  \e}
\&.
\&.  ds pile \ev\[aq](-0.5m + (\en[pile-ht]u / 2u))\[aq]\e"
\&.  as pile \e*[pile-args]\e"
\&.  as pile \ev\[aq]((\en[pile-ht]u / 2u) + 0.5m)\[aq]\e"
\&.  as pile \eh\[aq]\en[pile-wd]u\[aq]\e"
\&..
\&.ec
.EE
.RE
.
.
.P
Another complication is the fact that some glyphs which represent
bracket pieces in AT&T
.I troff
can be used for other mathematical symbols as well,
for example
.B \[rs](lf
and
.B \[rs](rf
which provide the floor operator.
.
Some output postprocessors,
such as
.IR grodvi (@MAN1EXT@) ,
don't unify such glyphs.
.
For this reason,
the four glyphs
.BR \[rs][lf] ,
.BR \[rs][rf] ,
.BR \[rs][lc] ,
and
.BR \[rs][rc] ,
are not unified with similar-looking bracket pieces.
.
In
.IR groff ,
only glyphs with long names are guaranteed to pile up correctly for all
devices\[em]provided those glyphs exist.
.
.
.\" XXX: This table overruns 78n on nroff devices.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[lB]	\e[lB]	bracketleft	u005B	left square bracket
\[rB]	\e[rB]	bracketright	u005D	right square bracket
\[lC]	\e[lC]	braceleft	u007B	left brace
\[rC]	\e[rC]	braceright	u007D	right brace
\[la]	\e[la]	angleleft	u27E8	left angle bracket
\[ra]	\e[ra]	angleright	u27E9	right angle bracket
\[bv]	\e[bv]	braceex	u23AA	brace vertical extension *** +
\[braceex]	\e[braceex]	braceex	u23AA	brace vertical extension

\[bracketlefttp]	\e[bracketlefttp]	bracketlefttp	u23A1	left square bracket top
\[bracketleftbt]	\e[bracketleftbt]	bracketleftbt	u23A3	left square bracket bottom
\[bracketleftex]	\e[bracketleftex]	bracketleftex	u23A2	left square bracket extension
\[bracketrighttp]	\e[bracketrighttp]	bracketrighttp	u23A4	right square bracket top
\[bracketrightbt]	\e[bracketrightbt]	bracketrightbt	u23A6	right square bracket bottom
\[bracketrightex]	\e[bracketrightex]	bracketrightex	u23A5	right square bracket extension

\[lt]	\e[lt]	bracelefttp	u23A7	left brace top +
\[bracelefttp]	\e[bracelefttp]	bracelefttp	u23A7	left brace top
\[lk]	\e[lk]	braceleftmid	u23A8	left brace middle +
\[braceleftmid]	\e[braceleftmid]	braceleftmid	u23A8	left brace middle
\[lb]	\e[lb]	braceleftbt	u23A9	left brace bottom +
\[braceleftbt]	\e[braceleftbt]	braceleftbt	u23A9	left brace bottom
\[braceleftex]	\e[braceleftex]	braceleftex	u23AA	left brace extension
\[rt]	\e[rt]	bracerighttp	u23AB	right brace top +
\[bracerighttp]	\e[bracerighttp]	bracerighttp	u23AB	right brace top
\[rk]	\e[rk]	bracerightmid	u23AC	right brace middle +
\[bracerightmid]	\e[bracerightmid]	bracerightmid	u23AC	right brace middle
\[rb]	\e[rb]	bracerightbt	u23AD	right brace bottom +
\[bracerightbt]	\e[bracerightbt]	bracerightbt	u23AD	right brace bottom
\[bracerightex]	\e[bracerightex]	bracerightex	u23AA	right brace extension
\[parenlefttp]	\e[parenlefttp]	parenlefttp	u239B	left parenthesis top
\[parenleftbt]	\e[parenleftbt]	parenleftbt	u239D	left parenthesis bottom
\[parenleftex]	\e[parenleftex]	parenleftex	u239C	left parenthesis extension
\[parenrighttp]	\e[parenrighttp]	parenrighttp	u239E	right parenthesis top
\[parenrightbt]	\e[parenrightbt]	parenrightbt	u23A0	right parenthesis bottom
\[parenrightex]	\e[parenrightex]	parenrightex	u239F	right parenthesis extension
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Arrows
.\" ====================================================================
.
.\" XXX: This table overruns 78n on nroff devices.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[<-]	\e[<-]	arrowleft	u2190	horizontal arrow left +
\[->]	\e[->]	arrowright	u2192	horizontal arrow right +
\[<>]	\e[<>]	arrowboth	u2194	bidirectional horizontal arrow
\[da]	\e[da]	arrowdown	u2193	vertical arrow down +
\[ua]	\e[ua]	arrowup	u2191	vertical arrow up +
\[va]	\e[va]	arrowupdn	u2195	bidirectional vertical arrow
\[lA]	\e[lA]	arrowdblleft	u21D0	horizontal double arrow left
\[rA]	\e[rA]	arrowdblright	u21D2	horizontal double arrow right
\[hA]	\e[hA]	arrowdblboth	u21D4	bidirectional horizontal double arrow
\[dA]	\e[dA]	arrowdbldown	u21D3	vertical double arrow down
\[uA]	\e[uA]	arrowdblup	u21D1	vertical double arrow up
\[vA]	\e[vA]	uni21D5	u21D5	bidirectional vertical double arrow
\[an]	\e[an]	arrowhorizex	u23AF	horizontal arrow extension
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Rules and lines"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The font-invariant glyphs
.BR \[rs][br] ,
.BR \[rs][ul] ,
and
.B \[rs][rn]
form corners when adjacent;
they can be used to build boxes.
.
Note that both the AGL and the Unicode-derived names of these three
glyphs are rough approximations.
.
.
.P
.B \[rs][rn]
also serves in AT&T
.I troff
as the horizontal extension of the radical
(square root)
sign.
.
The baseline rule
.B \[rs][ru]
is a font-invariant glyph,
namely a rule of one-half em.
.
.
.P
Use
.B \[rs][radicalex]
(see subsection \[lq]Mathematical symbols\[rq] below),
not
.BR \[rs][overline] ,
for continuation of radical signs
(e.g.,
square roots).
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
|	|	bar	u007C	bar
\[ba]	\e[ba]	bar	u007C	bar
\[br]	\e[br]	SF110000	u2502	box rule +
\[ul]	\e[ul]	underscore	u005F	underscore, low line +
\[rn]	\e[rn]	overline	u203E	overline +
\[ru]	\e[ru]	---	---	baseline rule +
\[bb]	\e[bb]	brokenbar	u00A6	broken bar
\[sl]	\e[sl]	slash	u002F	slash, solidus +
\[rs]	\e[rs]	backslash	u005C	reverse solidus
.TE
.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Text markers"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[ci]	\e[ci]	circle	u25CB	circle +
\[bu]	\e[bu]	bullet	u2022	bullet +
\[dg]	\e[dg]	dagger	u2020	dagger +
\[dd]	\e[dd]	daggerdbl	u2021	double dagger +
\[lz]	\e[lz]	lozenge	u25CA	lozenge, diamond
\[sq]	\e[sq]	uni25A1	u25A1	square +
\[ps]	\e[ps]	paragraph	u00B6	pilcrow sign
\[sc]	\e[sc]	section	u00A7	section sign +
\[lh]	\e[lh]	uni261C	u261C	hand pointing left +
\[rh]	\e[rh]	a14	u261E	hand pointing right +
\[at]	\e[at]	at	u0040	at sign
\[sh]	\e[sh]	numbersign	u0023	number sign
\[CR]	\e[CR]	carriagereturn	u21B5	carriage return
\[OK]	\e[OK]	a19	u2713	check mark
.TE
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Legal symbols"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The Bell Systems logo is not supported in
.IR groff .
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[co]	\e[co]	copyright	u00A9	copyright sign +
\[rg]	\e[rg]	registered	u00AE	registered sign +
\[tm]	\e[tm]	trademark	u2122	trade mark sign
\[bs]	\e[bs]	---	---	Bell Systems logo +
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Currency symbols"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[Do]	\e[Do]	dollar	u0024	dollar sign
\[ct]	\e[ct]	cent	u00A2	cent sign +
\[eu]	\e[eu]	---	u20AC	Euro sign
\[Eu]	\e[Eu]	Euro	u20AC	variant Euro sign
\[Ye]	\e[Ye]	yen	u00A5	yen sign
\[Po]	\e[Po]	sterling	u00A3	pound sign
\[Cs]	\e[Cs]	currency	u00A4	currency sign
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Units
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[de]	\e[de]	degree	u00B0	degree sign +
\[%0]	\e[%0]	perthousand	u2030	per thousand, per mille sign
\[fm]	\e[fm]	minute	u2032	arc minute sign +
\[sd]	\e[sd]	second	u2033	arc second sign
\[mc]	\e[mc]	mu	u00B5	micro sign
\[Of]	\e[Of]	ordfeminine	u00AA	feminine ordinal indicator
\[Om]	\e[Om]	ordmasculine	u00BA	masculine ordinal indicator
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Logical symbols"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Note the two variants of the not sign;
whether they differ in appearance or spacing will depend on the device
and font selected.
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[AN]	\e[AN]	logicaland	u2227	logical and
\[OR]	\e[OR]	logicalor	u2228	logical or
\[no]	\e[no]	logicalnot	u00AC	logical not + ***
\[tno]	\e[tno]	logicalnot	u00AC	text variant of \f[B]\e[no]\f[]
\[te]	\e[te]	existential	u2203	there exists
\[fa]	\e[fa]	universal	u2200	for all
\[st]	\e[st]	suchthat	u220B	such that
\[3d]	\e[3d]	therefore	u2234	therefore
\[tf]	\e[tf]	therefore	u2234	therefore
\[or]	\e[or]	bar	u007C	bitwise or +
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Mathematical symbols"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B \[rs][Fn]
also appears in see subsection \[lq]Supplementary Latin letters\[rq]
above.
.
Note the two varieties of the
plus-minus,
multiplication,
and division signs;
.BR \[rs][+\-] ,
.BR \[rs][mu] ,
and
.BR \[rs][di]
are normally drawn from the special font,
but have regular (\[lq]text\[rq]) font variants.
.
Also be aware of three glyphs available in special font variants that
are normally drawn from regular fonts:
the plus,
minus,
and equals signs.
.
Whether these variants differ in appearance or spacing will depend on
the device and font selected.
.
.\" XXX: This table overruns 78n on nroff devices.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[12]	\e[12]	onehalf	u00BD	one half symbol +
\[14]	\e[14]	onequarter	u00BC	one quarter symbol +
\[34]	\e[34]	threequarters	u00BE	three quarters symbol +
\[18]	\e[18]	oneeighth	u215B	one eighth symbol
\[38]	\e[38]	threeeighths	u215C	three eighths symbol
\[58]	\e[58]	fiveeighths	u215D	five eighths symbol
\[78]	\e[78]	seveneighths	u215E	seven eighths symbol
\[S1]	\e[S1]	onesuperior	u00B9	superscript one
\[S2]	\e[S2]	twosuperior	u00B2	superscript two
\[S3]	\e[S3]	threesuperior	u00B3	superscript three

+	+	plus	u002B	plus
\[pl]	\e[pl]	plus	u002B	special variant of plus +
\-	\e[-]	hyphen	u002D	minus
\[mi]	\e[mi]	minus	u2212	special variant of minus +
\[-+]	\e[-+]	uni2213	u2213	minus-plus
\[+-]	\e[+-]	plusminus	u00B1	plus-minus + ***
\[t+-]	\e[t+-]	plusminus	u00B1	text variant of \f[B]\e[+-]\f[]
\[pc]	\e[pc]	periodcentered	u00B7	centered period
\[md]	\e[md]	dotmath	u22C5	multiplication dot
\[mu]	\e[mu]	multiply	u00D7	multiplication sign + ***
\[tmu]	\e[tmu]	multiply	u00D7	text variant of \f[B]\e[mu]\f[]
\[c*]	\e[c*]	circlemultiply	u2297	circled times
\[c+]	\e[c+]	circleplus	u2295	circled plus
\[di]	\e[di]	divide	u00F7	division sign + ***
\[tdi]	\e[tdi]	divide	u00F7	text variant of \f[B]\e[di]\f[]
\[f/]	\e[f/]	fraction	u2044	fraction slash
\[**]	\e[**]	asteriskmath	u2217	mathematical asterisk +

\[<=]	\e[<=]	lessequal	u2264	less than or equal to +
\[>=]	\e[>=]	greaterequal	u2265	greater than or equal to +
\[<<]	\e[<<]	uni226A	u226A	much less than
\[>>]	\e[>>]	uni226B	u226B	much greater than
\&=	\&=	equal	u003D	equals
\[eq]	\e[eq]	equal	u003D	special variant of equals +
\[!=]	\e[!=]	notequal	u003D_0338	not equals +
\[==]	\e[==]	equivalence	u2261	equivalent +
\[ne]	\e[ne]	uni2262	u2261_0338	not equivalent
\[=~]	\e[=~]	congruent	u2245	congruent to, approximately equal to
\[|=]	\e[|=]	uni2243	u2243	asymptotically equal to +
\[ap]	\e[ap]	similar	u223C	similar to, tilde operator +
\[~~]	\e[~~]	approxequal	u2248	almost equal to
\[~=]	\e[~=]	approxequal	u2248	almost equal to
\[pt]	\e[pt]	proportional	u221D	proportional to +

\[es]	\e[es]	emptyset	u2205	empty set +
\[mo]	\e[mo]	element	u2208	element of a set +
\[nm]	\e[nm]	notelement	u2208_0338	not element of set
\[sb]	\e[sb]	propersubset	u2282	proper subset +
\[nb]	\e[nb]	notsubset	u2282_0338	not subset
\[sp]	\e[sp]	propersuperset	u2283	proper superset +
\[nc]	\e[nc]	uni2285	u2283_0338	not superset
\[ib]	\e[ib]	reflexsubset	u2286	subset or equal +
\[ip]	\e[ip]	reflexsuperset	u2287	superset or equal +
\[ca]	\e[ca]	intersection	u2229	intersection, cap +
\[cu]	\e[cu]	union	u222A	union, cup +

\[/_]	\e[/_]	angle	u2220	angle
\[pp]	\e[pp]	perpendicular	u22A5	perpendicular
\[is]	\e[is]	integral	u222B	integral +
\[integral]	\e[integral]	integral	u222B	integral ***
\[sum]	\e[sum]	summation	u2211	summation ***
\[product]	\e[product]	product	u220F	product ***
\[coproduct]	\e[coproduct]	uni2210	u2210	coproduct ***
\[gr]	\e[gr]	gradient	u2207	gradient +
\[sr]	\e[sr]	radical	u221A	radical sign, square root +
\[sqrt]	\e[sqrt]	radical	u221A	radical sign, square root
\[radicalex]	\e[radicalex]	radicalex	---	radical extension ***
\[sqrtex]	\e[sqrtex]	radicalex	---	radical extension ***

\[lc]	\e[lc]	uni2308	u2308	left ceiling +
\[rc]	\e[rc]	uni2309	u2309	right ceiling +
\[lf]	\e[lf]	uni230A	u230A	left floor +
\[rf]	\e[rf]	uni230B	u230B	right floor +

\[if]	\e[if]	infinity	u221E	infinity +
\[Ah]	\e[Ah]	aleph	u2135	aleph symbol
\[Fn]	\e[Fn]	florin	u0192	lowercase f with hook, function
\[Im]	\e[Im]	Ifraktur	u2111	blackletter I, imaginary part
\[Re]	\e[Re]	Rfraktur	u211C	blackletter R, real part
\[wp]	\e[wp]	weierstrass	u2118	Weierstrass p
\[pd]	\e[pd]	partialdiff	u2202	partial differential
\[-h]	\e[-h]	uni210F	u210F	h bar
\[hbar]	\e[hbar]	uni210F	u210F	h bar
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Greek glyphs"
.\" ====================================================================
.
These glyphs are intended for technical use,
not for real Greek;
normally,
the uppercase letters have upright shape,
and the lowercase ones are slanted.
.
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[*A]	\e[*A]	Alpha	u0391	uppercase alpha +
\[*B]	\e[*B]	Beta	u0392	uppercase beta +
\[*G]	\e[*G]	Gamma	u0393	uppercase gamma +
\[*D]	\e[*D]	Delta	u0394	uppercase delta +
\[*E]	\e[*E]	Epsilon	u0395	uppercase epsilon +
\[*Z]	\e[*Z]	Zeta	u0396	uppercase zeta +
\[*Y]	\e[*Y]	Eta	u0397	uppercase eta +
\[*H]	\e[*H]	Theta	u0398	uppercase theta +
\[*I]	\e[*I]	Iota	u0399	uppercase iota +
\[*K]	\e[*K]	Kappa	u039A	uppercase kappa +
\[*L]	\e[*L]	Lambda	u039B	uppercase lambda +
\[*M]	\e[*M]	Mu	u039C	uppercase mu +
\[*N]	\e[*N]	Nu	u039D	uppercase nu +
\[*C]	\e[*C]	Xi	u039E	uppercase xi +
\[*O]	\e[*O]	Omicron	u039F	uppercase omicron +
\[*P]	\e[*P]	Pi	u03A0	uppercase pi +
\[*R]	\e[*R]	Rho	u03A1	uppercase rho +
\[*S]	\e[*S]	Sigma	u03A3	uppercase sigma +
\[*T]	\e[*T]	Tau	u03A4	uppercase tau +
\[*U]	\e[*U]	Upsilon	u03A5	uppercase upsilon +
\[*F]	\e[*F]	Phi	u03A6	uppercase phi +
\[*X]	\e[*X]	Chi	u03A7	uppercase chi +
\[*Q]	\e[*Q]	Psi	u03A8	uppercase psi +
\[*W]	\e[*W]	Omega	u03A9	uppercase omega +

\[*a]	\e[*a]	alpha	u03B1	lowercase alpha +
\[*b]	\e[*b]	beta	u03B2	lowercase beta +
\[*g]	\e[*g]	gamma	u03B3	lowercase gamma +
\[*d]	\e[*d]	delta	u03B4	lowercase delta +
\[*e]	\e[*e]	epsilon	u03B5	lowercase epsilon +
\[*z]	\e[*z]	zeta	u03B6	lowercase zeta +
\[*y]	\e[*y]	eta	u03B7	lowercase eta +
\[*h]	\e[*h]	theta	u03B8	lowercase theta +
\[*i]	\e[*i]	iota	u03B9	lowercase iota +
\[*k]	\e[*k]	kappa	u03BA	lowercase kappa +
\[*l]	\e[*l]	lambda	u03BB	lowercase lambda +
\[*m]	\e[*m]	mu	u03BC	lowercase mu +
\[*n]	\e[*n]	nu	u03BD	lowercase nu +
\[*c]	\e[*c]	xi	u03BE	lowercase xi +
\[*o]	\e[*o]	omicron	u03BF	lowercase omicron +
\[*p]	\e[*p]	pi	u03C0	lowercase pi +
\[*r]	\e[*r]	rho	u03C1	lowercase rho +
\[ts]	\e[ts]	sigma1	u03C2	terminal lowercase sigma +
\[*s]	\e[*s]	sigma	u03C3	lowercase sigma +
\[*t]	\e[*t]	tau	u03C4	lowercase tau +
\[*u]	\e[*u]	upsilon	u03C5	lowercase upsilon +
\[*f]	\e[*f]	phi	u03D5	lowercase phi +
\[*x]	\e[*x]	chi	u03C7	lowercase chi +
\[*q]	\e[*q]	psi	u03C8	lowercase psi +
\[*w]	\e[*w]	omega	u03C9	lowercase omega +

\[+h]	\e[+h]	theta1	u03D1	variant theta
\[+f]	\e[+f]	phi1	u03C6	variant phi (curly shape)
\[+p]	\e[+p]	omega1	u03D6	variant pi (similar to omega)
\[+e]	\e[+e]	uni03F5	u03F5	variant epsilon (lunate)
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Playing card symbols"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TS
l l l l lx.
Output	Input	AGL	Unicode	Notes
_
\[CL]	\e[CL]	club	u2663	solid club suit
\[SP]	\e[SP]	spade	u2660	solid spade suit
\[HE]	\e[HE]	heart	u2665	solid heart suit
\[DI]	\e[DI]	diamond	u2666	solid diamond suit
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Authors
.\" ====================================================================
.
This document was written by
.MT jjc@\:jclark.com
James Clark
.ME ,
with additions by
.MT wl@\:gnu.org
Werner Lemberg
.ME
and
.MT groff\-bernd.warken\-72@\:web.de
Bernd Warken
.ME ,
and revised to use real tables by
.MT esr@\:thyrsus.com
Eric S.\& Raymond
.ME .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See Also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" ,
by Trent A.\& Fisher and Werner Lemberg,
is the primary
.I groff
manual.
.
Section \[lq]Using Symbols\[rq] may be of particular note.
.
You can browse it interactively with \[lq]info \[aq](groff)Using
Symbols\[aq]\[rq].
.
.
.P
\[lq]An extension to the
.I troff
character set for Europe\[rq],
E.G.\& Keizer,
K.J.\& Simonsen,
J.\& Akkerhuis;
EUUG Newsletter,
Volume 9,
No.\& 2,
Summer 1989
.
.
.P
.UR https://\:github\:.com/\:adobe\-type\-tools/\:agl\-aglfn/\:blob/\:\
master/\:glyphlist\:.txt
Adobe Glyph List (AGL)
.UE
.
.
.P
.UR http://\:www\:.unicode\:.org
The Unicode Standard
.UE
.
.
.P
.UR https://\:www\:.aivosto\:.com/\:articles/\:charsets\-7bit\:.html
\[lq]7-bit Character Sets\[rq]
.UE
by Tuomas Salste documents the inherent ambiguity and configurability
(in terms of variable code points)
of the ASCII encoding standard.
.
.
.P
.IR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.IR groff (@MAN7EXT@)
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_groff_char_7_man_C]
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" tab-width: 20
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff tabstop=20 textwidth=72:
