.TH groff_rfc1345 7
.SH NAME

groff_rfc1345 \- Groff glyph names based on RFC 1345

.SH DESCRIPTION

The file rfc1345.tmac defines escape sequences based on the glyph
mnemonics specified in RFC 1345 and the digraph table of the text
editor Vim.  Each escape translates to a Unicode code point, and
will render correctly if the underlying font is a Unicode font
that covers that code point.

For example, \e[Rx] is the recipe or PRESCRIPTION TAKE symbol,
and maps to the code point U+211E.  Groff lets you write it as
\e[u211E], but \e[Rx] is more mnemonic. 

For a list of the glyph names provided, please see the file
rfc1345.tmac, which contains definitions of the form

    .char \e[Rx] \e[u211E]    \e" PRESCRIPTION TAKE

where .char's first argument is the mnemonic glyph name, its
second argument is the Groff sequence based on the code point,
and the comment describes the glyph defined.

The RFC 1345 glyph names cover a wide range of Unicode code
points: including supplemental Latin, Greek, Cyrillic, Hebrew,
Arabic, Hiragana, Katakana, and Bopomofo letters, punctuation,
math notation, currency symbols, industrial and entertainment
icons, and box drawing symbols.

The Vim digraph table is practically a small subset of RFC 1345
(being limited to two-character mnemonics), but as a newer system
it does add four new mnemonics not specified in the RFC.  These
have also been added to rfc1345.tmac.

rfc1345.tmac contains a total of 1696 glyph names.  It is not an
error to load rfc1345.tmac if your font does not have all the
glyphs, as long as it contains the glyphs that you actually use
in your document.

.SH USAGE

Load the rfc1345.tmac file.  This can be done by either adding

    .mso rfc1345.tmac

in your document before first use of any of the defined
glyph names, or by using the command-line option

    -m rfc1345

.SH SEE ALSO

RFC 1345, by Keld Simonsen, June 1992.  Available at
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1345.

The Vim digraph table, as listed by the Vim command :help
digraph-table.

groff_char(7)
