.TH EQN2GRAPH @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
eqn2graph \- convert an EQN equation into a cropped image
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legalese
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" This documentation is released to the public domain.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY eqn2graph
.OP \-format output-format
.RI [ \%convert-arguments ]
.YS
.
.SY eqn2graph
.B \-\-help
.SY eqn2graph
.RB { \-v | \-\-version }
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I eqn2graph
reads a one-line
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
equation from the standard input and writes an image file,
by default in Portable Network Graphics (PNG) format,
to the standard output.
.
.
.PP
The input
.I EQN
code should
.I not
be preceded by the
.B \&.EQ
macro that normally precedes it within
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@)
macros;
nor do you need to have dollar-sign or other delimiters around the
equation.
.
.
.\" FIXME: How old?  This text hasn't been touched since 2008 at latest.
.\" Older versions of
.\" .I \%convert
.\" will produce a black-on-white graphic; newer ones may produce a
.\" black-on-transparent graphic.
.
.PP
Arguments not recognized by
.I eqn2graph
are passed to the ImageMagick or GraphicsMagick program
.BR \%convert (1).
.
.
By specifying these, you can give your image a border,
.\" Transparent backgrounds are the default in 2018.
.\" force the background transparent,
set the image's pixel density,
or perform other useful transformations.
.
.
.PP
The output image is clipped using
.IR convert 's
.B \-trim
option to the smallest possible bounding box that contains all the black
pixels.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.BI "\-format " output-format
Write the image in
.IR output-format ,
which must be understood by
.IR convert ;
the default is PNG.
.
.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display a brief usage message and exit.
.
.
.TP
.B \-v
.TQ
.B \-\-version
Display
.IR pic2graph 's
version string and exit.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.B \%GROFF_TMPDIR
.TQ
.B \%TMPDIR
.TQ
.B \%TMP
.TQ
.B \%TEMP
These environment variables are searched in the given order to determine
the directory where temporary files will be created.
.
If none are set,
.I /tmp
is used.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I eqn2graph
was written by
.MT esr@\:thyrsus.com
Eric S.\& Raymond
.ME ,
based on a recipe for
.BR pic2graph (@MAN1EXT@),
by W.\& Richard Stevens.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.BR pic2graph (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR grap2graph (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR convert (1)
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff:
